docs/src/main/sphinx/security/built-in-system-access-control.rst, before:

=====================
System access control
=====================

A system access control enforces authorization at a global level,
before any connector level authorization. You can use one of the built-in
implementations in Trino, or provide your own by following the guidelines in
:doc:`/develop/system-access-control`.

Multiple system access control implementations may be configured at once
using the ``access-control.config-files`` configuration property. It should
contain a comma separated list of the access control property files to use
(rather than the default ``etc/access-control.properties``).

Trino offers the following built-in implementations:

================================================== =================================================================
System access control name                         Description
================================================== =================================================================
``default``                                        All operations are permitted, except for user impersonation.
                                                   This is the default access control if none are configured.

``allow-all``                                      All operations are permitted.

``read-only``                                      Operations that read data or metadata are permitted, but
                                                   none of the operations that write data or metadata are allowed.

``file``                                           Authorization rules are specified in a config file.
                                                   See :doc:`file-system-access-control`.
================================================== =================================================================

If you want to limit access on a system level in any other way than the ones
listed above, you must implement a custom :doc:`/develop/system-access-control`.

Read only system access control
===============================

This access control allows any operation that reads data or
metadata, such as ``SELECT`` or ``SHOW``. Setting system level or catalog level
session properties is also permitted. However, any operation that writes data or
metadata, such as ``CREATE``, ``INSERT`` or ``DELETE``, is prohibited.
To use this access control, add an ``etc/access-control.properties``
file with the following contents:

.. code-block:: text

   access-control.name=read-only

Commit message:

Document changes in default access control

docs/src/main/sphinx/security/built-in-system-access-control.rst, after:

=====================
System access control
=====================

A system access control enforces authorization at a global level,
before any connector level authorization. You can use one of the built-in
implementations in Trino, or provide your own by following the guidelines in
:doc:`/develop/system-access-control`.

Multiple system access control implementations may be configured at once
using the ``access-control.config-files`` configuration property. It should
contain a comma separated list of the access control property files to use
(rather than the default ``etc/access-control.properties``).

Trino offers the following built-in implementations:

================================================== =================================================================
System access control name                         Description
================================================== =================================================================
``default``                                        All operations are permitted, except for user impersonation or
                                                   updating node system information (like node shutdown).

                                                   This is the default access control if none are configured.

``allow-all``                                      All operations are permitted.

``read-only``                                      Operations that read data or metadata are permitted, but
                                                   none of the operations that write data or metadata are allowed.

``file``                                           Authorization rules are specified in a config file.
                                                   See :doc:`file-system-access-control`.
================================================== =================================================================

If you want to limit access on a system level in any other way than the ones
listed above, you must implement a custom :doc:`/develop/system-access-control`.

Notice that access control needs to be configured on the coordinator. However authorization for certain operations
like updating node system information that covers request of node shutdown is performed on worker. In such cases
access control should be configured on workers too.

Read only system access control
===============================

This access control allows any operation that reads data or
metadata, such as ``SELECT`` or ``SHOW``. Setting system level or catalog level
session properties is also permitted. However, any operation that writes data or
metadata, such as ``CREATE``, ``INSERT`` or ``DELETE``, is prohibited.
To use this access control, add an ``etc/access-control.properties``
file with the following contents:

.. code-block:: text

   access-control.name=read-only
