docs/src/main/sphinx/installation/cli.rst, before:

======================
Command line interface
======================

The Trino CLI provides a terminal-based, interactive shell for running
queries. The CLI is a
`self-executing <http://skife.org/java/unix/2011/06/20/really_executable_jars.html>`_
JAR file, which means it acts like a normal UNIX executable.

Requirements
------------

The CLI requires a Java virtual machine available on the path.
It can be used with Java version 8 and higher.

Installation
------------

Download :maven_download:`cli`, rename it to ``trino``,
make it executable with ``chmod +x``, then run it:

.. code-block:: text

    ./trino --server localhost:8080 --catalog hive --schema default

Run the CLI with the ``--help`` option to see the available options.

The CLI uses the HTTP protocol and the
:doc:`Trino client REST API </develop/client-protocol>` to communicate
with Trino.

TLS/HTTPS
---------

Trino is typically available with an HTTPS URL. This means that all network
traffic between the CLI and Trino uses TLS. :doc:`TLS configuration
</security/tls>` is common, since it is a requirement for any authentication.

Use the HTTPS URL to connect to the server:

.. code-block:: text

    ./trino --server https://trino.example.com

The recommended TLS implementation is to use a globally trusted certificate. In
this case, no other options are necessary, since the JVM running the CLI
recognizes these certificates.

Use ``--help`` to see information about specifying the keystore, truststore, and
other authentication details as required.

Authentication
--------------

The Trino CLI supports many :doc:`/security/authentication-types` detailed in
the following sections:

Username and password authentication
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Username and password authentication is typically configured in a cluster with
the ``PASSWORD`` authentication type.

If your Trino server requires password authentication, use the ``--password``
option to have the CLI prompt for a password. If your cluster uses a different
username, you can override your username with the ``--user`` option. It defaults
to your operating system username.

The following code example connects to the server, establishes your user name,
and prompts the CLI for your password:

 .. code-block:: text

  ./trino --server https://trino.example.com --user=myusername --password

You can set the ``TRINO_PASSWORD`` environment variable with the password value
to avoid the prompt.

.. _cli-external-sso-auth:

External authentication - SSO
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Use the ``--external-authentication`` option for browser-based SSO
authentication, as detailed in :doc:`/security/oauth2`. With this configuration,
the CLI displays a URL that you must open in a web browser for authentication.

The detailed behavior is as follows:

* Start the CLI with the ``--external-authentication`` option and execute a
  query.
* The CLI starts and connects to Trino.
* A message appears in the CLI directing you to open a browser with a specified
  URL when the first query is submitted.
* Open the URL in a browser and follow through the authentication process.
* The CLI automatically receives a token.
* When successfully authenticated in the browser, the CLI proceeds to execute
  the query.
* Further queries in the CLI session do not require additional logins while the
  authentication token remains valid. Token expiration depends on the external
  authentication type configuration.
* Expired tokens force you to log in again.

.. _cli-certificate-auth:

Certificate authentication
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Use the following CLI arguments to connect to a cluster that uses
:doc:`certificate authentication </security/certificate>`.

.. list-table:: CLI options for certificate authentication
   :widths: 35 65
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Option
     - Description
   * - ``--keystore-path=<path>``
     - Absolute or relative path to a :doc:`PEM </security/inspect-pem>` or
       :doc:`JKS </security/inspect-jks>` file, which must contain a certificate
       that is trusted by the Trino cluster you are connecting to.
   * - ``--keystore-password=<password>``
     - Only required if the keystore has a password.

The four ``--truststore`` related options are independent of client certificate
authentication with the CLI; instead, they control the client's trust of the
server's certificate.

.. list-table:: CLI options to check server certificate trust
   :widths: 35 65
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Option
     - Description
   * - ``--truststore-use-system-store``
     - Instruct the client to use the system TrustStore based on the operating system.
       The TrustStore specification can be overridden using ``--truststore-type``.

.. _cli-jwt-auth:

JWT authentication
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To access a Trino cluster configured to use :doc:`/security/jwt`, use the
``--access-token=<token>`` option to pass a JWT to the server.

Kerberos authentication
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If your cluster is secured with Kerberos authentication, see
:doc:`/security/cli`.

Pagination
----------

By default, the results of queries are paginated using the ``less`` program
which is configured with a carefully selected set of options. This behavior
can be overridden by setting the environment variable ``TRINO_PAGER`` to the
name of a different program such as ``more`` or `pspg <https://github.com/okbob/pspg>`_,
or it can be set to an empty value to completely disable pagination.

History
-------

The CLI keeps a history of your previously used commands. You can access your
history by scrolling or searching. Use the up and down arrows to scroll and
:kbd:`Control+S` and :kbd:`Control+R` to search. To execute a query again,
press :kbd:`Enter`.

By default, you can locate the Trino history file in ``~/.trino_history``.
Use the ``TRINO_HISTORY_FILE`` environment variable to change the default.

Output Formats
--------------

The Trino CLI provides the option ``--output-format`` to control how the output
is displayed when running in noninteractive mode. The available options shown in
the following table must be entered in uppercase. The default value is ``CSV``.

.. list-table:: Output format options
  :widths: 25, 75
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Option
    - Description
  * - ``CSV``
    - Comma-separated values, each value quoted. No header row.
  * - ``CSV_HEADER``
    - Comma-separated values, quoted with header row.
  * - ``CSV_UNQUOTED``
    - Comma-separated values without quotes.
  * - ``CSV_HEADER_UNQUOTED``
    - Comma-separated values with header row but no quotes.
  * - ``TSV``
    - Tab-separated values.
  * - ``TSV_HEADER``
    - Tab-separated values with header row.
  * - ``JSON``
    - Output rows emitted as JSON objects with name-value pairs.
  * - ``ALIGNED``
    - Output emitted as an ASCII character table with values.
  * - ``VERTICAL``
    - Output emitted as record-oriented top-down lines, one per value.
  * - ``NULL``
    - Suppresses normal query results. This can be useful during development
      to test a query's shell return code or to see whether it results in
      error messages.

Examples
^^^^^^^^

Consider the following command run as shown, or with the
``--output-format=CSV`` option, which is the default for non-interactive usage:

.. code-block:: text

    trino --execute 'SELECT nationkey, name, regionkey FROM tpch.sf1.nation LIMIT 3'

The output is as follows:

.. code-block:: text

    "0","ALGERIA","0"
    "1","ARGENTINA","1"
    "2","BRAZIL","1"

The output with the ``--output-format=JSON`` option:

.. code-block:: json

    {"nationkey":0,"name":"ALGERIA","regionkey":0}
    {"nationkey":1,"name":"ARGENTINA","regionkey":1}
    {"nationkey":2,"name":"BRAZIL","regionkey":1}

The output with the ``--output-format=ALIGNED`` option, which is the default
for interactive usage:

.. code-block:: text

    nationkey |   name    | regionkey
    ----------+-----------+----------
            0 | ALGERIA   |         0
            1 | ARGENTINA |         1
            2 | BRAZIL    |         1

The output with the ``--output-format=VERTICAL`` option:

.. code-block:: text

    -[ RECORD 1 ]--------
    nationkey | 0
    name      | ALGERIA
    regionkey | 0
    -[ RECORD 2 ]--------
    nationkey | 1
    name      | ARGENTINA
    regionkey | 1
    -[ RECORD 3 ]--------
    nationkey | 2
    name      | BRAZIL
    regionkey | 1

The preceding command with ``--output-format=NULL`` produces no output.
However, if you have an error in the query, such as incorrectly using
``region`` instead of ``regionkey``, the command has an exit status of 1
and displays an error message (which is unaffected by the output format):

.. code-block:: text

    Query 20200707_170726_00030_2iup9 failed: line 1:25: Column 'region' cannot be resolved
    SELECT nationkey, name, region FROM tpch.sf1.nation LIMIT 3

Troubleshooting
---------------

If something goes wrong, you see an error message:

.. code-block:: text

    $ trino
    trino> select count(*) from tpch.tiny.nations;
    Query 20200804_201646_00003_f5f6c failed: line 1:22: Table 'tpch.tiny.nations' does not exist
    select count(*) from tpch.tiny.nations

To view debug information, including the stack trace for failures, use the
``--debug`` option:

.. code-block:: text

    $ trino --debug
    trino> select count(*) from tpch.tiny.nations;
    Query 20200804_201629_00002_f5f6c failed: line 1:22: Table 'tpch.tiny.nations' does not exist
    io.trino.spi.TrinoException: line 1:22: Table 'tpch.tiny.nations' does not exist
    at io.trino.sql.analyzer.SemanticExceptions.semanticException(SemanticExceptions.java:48)
    at io.trino.sql.analyzer.SemanticExceptions.semanticException(SemanticExceptions.java:43)
    ...
    at java.base/java.lang.Thread.run(Thread.java:834)
    select count(*) from tpch.tiny.nations

Commit message:

Fix default Windows system TrustStore type and docs
Set the default system TrustStore type to the Windows ROOT CA keystore and expand the flag documentation.

This make Trino client use the ROOT CA certificate keystore to validate
the server identity, users can alternatively set the TrustStore type to
Windows-MY if verifying against the server certificate itself is needed.

docs/src/main/sphinx/installation/cli.rst, after:

======================
Command line interface
======================

The Trino CLI provides a terminal-based, interactive shell for running
queries. The CLI is a
`self-executing <http://skife.org/java/unix/2011/06/20/really_executable_jars.html>`_
JAR file, which means it acts like a normal UNIX executable.

Requirements
------------

The CLI requires a Java virtual machine available on the path.
It can be used with Java version 8 and higher.

Installation
------------

Download :maven_download:`cli`, rename it to ``trino``,
make it executable with ``chmod +x``, then run it:

.. code-block:: text

    ./trino --server localhost:8080 --catalog hive --schema default

Run the CLI with the ``--help`` option to see the available options.

The CLI uses the HTTP protocol and the
:doc:`Trino client REST API </develop/client-protocol>` to communicate
with Trino.

TLS/HTTPS
---------

Trino is typically available with an HTTPS URL. This means that all network
traffic between the CLI and Trino uses TLS. :doc:`TLS configuration
</security/tls>` is common, since it is a requirement for any authentication.

Use the HTTPS URL to connect to the server:

.. code-block:: text

    ./trino --server https://trino.example.com

The recommended TLS implementation is to use a globally trusted certificate. In
this case, no other options are necessary, since the JVM running the CLI
recognizes these certificates.

Use ``--help`` to see information about specifying the keystore, truststore, and
other authentication details as required.

Authentication
--------------

The Trino CLI supports many :doc:`/security/authentication-types` detailed in
the following sections:

Username and password authentication
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Username and password authentication is typically configured in a cluster with
the ``PASSWORD`` authentication type.

If your Trino server requires password authentication, use the ``--password``
option to have the CLI prompt for a password. If your cluster uses a different
username, you can override your username with the ``--user`` option. It defaults
to your operating system username.

The following code example connects to the server, establishes your user name,
and prompts the CLI for your password:

 .. code-block:: text

  ./trino --server https://trino.example.com --user=myusername --password

You can set the ``TRINO_PASSWORD`` environment variable with the password value
to avoid the prompt.

.. _cli-external-sso-auth:

External authentication - SSO
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Use the ``--external-authentication`` option for browser-based SSO
authentication, as detailed in :doc:`/security/oauth2`. With this configuration,
the CLI displays a URL that you must open in a web browser for authentication.

The detailed behavior is as follows:

* Start the CLI with the ``--external-authentication`` option and execute a
  query.
* The CLI starts and connects to Trino.
* A message appears in the CLI directing you to open a browser with a specified
  URL when the first query is submitted.
* Open the URL in a browser and follow through the authentication process.
* The CLI automatically receives a token.
* When successfully authenticated in the browser, the CLI proceeds to execute
  the query.
* Further queries in the CLI session do not require additional logins while the
  authentication token remains valid. Token expiration depends on the external
  authentication type configuration.
* Expired tokens force you to log in again.

.. _cli-certificate-auth:

Certificate authentication
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Use the following CLI arguments to connect to a cluster that uses
:doc:`certificate authentication </security/certificate>`.

.. list-table:: CLI options for certificate authentication
   :widths: 35 65
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Option
     - Description
   * - ``--keystore-path=<path>``
     - Absolute or relative path to a :doc:`PEM </security/inspect-pem>` or
       :doc:`JKS </security/inspect-jks>` file, which must contain a certificate
       that is trusted by the Trino cluster you are connecting to.
   * - ``--keystore-password=<password>``
     - Only required if the keystore has a password.

The four ``--truststore`` related options are independent of client certificate
authentication with the CLI; instead, they control the client's trust of the
server's certificate.

.. list-table:: CLI options to check server certificate trust
   :widths: 35 65
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Option
     - Description
   * - ``--truststore-use-system-store``
     - Instruct the client to use the system TrustStore based on the operating system.
       The supported OS are Windows and MacOS, for other OS the default Java TrustStore is loaded.
       The TrustStore specification can be overridden using ``--truststore-type``.

.. _cli-jwt-auth:

JWT authentication
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To access a Trino cluster configured to use :doc:`/security/jwt`, use the
``--access-token=<token>`` option to pass a JWT to the server.

Kerberos authentication
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If your cluster is secured with Kerberos authentication, see
:doc:`/security/cli`.

Pagination
----------

By default, the results of queries are paginated using the ``less`` program
which is configured with a carefully selected set of options. This behavior
can be overridden by setting the environment variable ``TRINO_PAGER`` to the
name of a different program such as ``more`` or `pspg <https://github.com/okbob/pspg>`_,
or it can be set to an empty value to completely disable pagination.

History
-------

The CLI keeps a history of your previously used commands. You can access your
history by scrolling or searching. Use the up and down arrows to scroll and
:kbd:`Control+S` and :kbd:`Control+R` to search. To execute a query again,
press :kbd:`Enter`.

By default, you can locate the Trino history file in ``~/.trino_history``.
Use the ``TRINO_HISTORY_FILE`` environment variable to change the default.

Output Formats
--------------

The Trino CLI provides the option ``--output-format`` to control how the output
is displayed when running in noninteractive mode. The available options shown in
the following table must be entered in uppercase. The default value is ``CSV``.

.. list-table:: Output format options
  :widths: 25, 75
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Option
    - Description
  * - ``CSV``
    - Comma-separated values, each value quoted. No header row.
  * - ``CSV_HEADER``
    - Comma-separated values, quoted with header row.
  * - ``CSV_UNQUOTED``
    - Comma-separated values without quotes.
  * - ``CSV_HEADER_UNQUOTED``
    - Comma-separated values with header row but no quotes.
  * - ``TSV``
    - Tab-separated values.
  * - ``TSV_HEADER``
    - Tab-separated values with header row.
  * - ``JSON``
    - Output rows emitted as JSON objects with name-value pairs.
  * - ``ALIGNED``
    - Output emitted as an ASCII character table with values.
  * - ``VERTICAL``
    - Output emitted as record-oriented top-down lines, one per value.
  * - ``NULL``
    - Suppresses normal query results. This can be useful during development
      to test a query's shell return code or to see whether it results in
      error messages.

Examples
^^^^^^^^

Consider the following command run as shown, or with the
``--output-format=CSV`` option, which is the default for non-interactive usage:

.. code-block:: text

    trino --execute 'SELECT nationkey, name, regionkey FROM tpch.sf1.nation LIMIT 3'

The output is as follows:

.. code-block:: text

    "0","ALGERIA","0"
    "1","ARGENTINA","1"
    "2","BRAZIL","1"

The output with the ``--output-format=JSON`` option:

.. code-block:: json

    {"nationkey":0,"name":"ALGERIA","regionkey":0}
    {"nationkey":1,"name":"ARGENTINA","regionkey":1}
    {"nationkey":2,"name":"BRAZIL","regionkey":1}

The output with the ``--output-format=ALIGNED`` option, which is the default
for interactive usage:

.. code-block:: text

    nationkey |   name    | regionkey
    ----------+-----------+----------
            0 | ALGERIA   |         0
            1 | ARGENTINA |         1
            2 | BRAZIL    |         1

The output with the ``--output-format=VERTICAL`` option:

.. code-block:: text

    -[ RECORD 1 ]--------
    nationkey | 0
    name      | ALGERIA
    regionkey | 0
    -[ RECORD 2 ]--------
    nationkey | 1
    name      | ARGENTINA
    regionkey | 1
    -[ RECORD 3 ]--------
    nationkey | 2
    name      | BRAZIL
    regionkey | 1

The preceding command with ``--output-format=NULL`` produces no output.
However, if you have an error in the query, such as incorrectly using
``region`` instead of ``regionkey``, the command has an exit status of 1
and displays an error message (which is unaffected by the output format):

.. code-block:: text

    Query 20200707_170726_00030_2iup9 failed: line 1:25: Column 'region' cannot be resolved
    SELECT nationkey, name, region FROM tpch.sf1.nation LIMIT 3

Troubleshooting
---------------

If something goes wrong, you see an error message:

.. code-block:: text

    $ trino
    trino> select count(*) from tpch.tiny.nations;
    Query 20200804_201646_00003_f5f6c failed: line 1:22: Table 'tpch.tiny.nations' does not exist
    select count(*) from tpch.tiny.nations

To view debug information, including the stack trace for failures, use the
``--debug`` option:

.. code-block:: text

    $ trino --debug
    trino> select count(*) from tpch.tiny.nations;
    Query 20200804_201629_00002_f5f6c failed: line 1:22: Table 'tpch.tiny.nations' does not exist
    io.trino.spi.TrinoException: line 1:22: Table 'tpch.tiny.nations' does not exist
    at io.trino.sql.analyzer.SemanticExceptions.semanticException(SemanticExceptions.java:48)
    at io.trino.sql.analyzer.SemanticExceptions.semanticException(SemanticExceptions.java:43)
    ...
    at java.base/java.lang.Thread.run(Thread.java:834)
    select count(*) from tpch.tiny.nations
