docs/src/main/sphinx/installation/jdbc.rst, before:

===========
JDBC driver
===========

The Trino `JDBC driver <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JDBC_driver>`_ allows
users to access Trino using Java-based applications, and other non-Java
applications running in a JVM. Both desktop and server-side applications, such
as those used for reporting and database development, use the JDBC driver.

Requirements
------------

The Trino JDBC driver has the following requirements:

* Java version 8 or higher.
* All users that connect to Trino with the JDBC driver must be granted access to
  query tables in the ``system.jdbc`` schema.

Installing
----------

Download :maven_download:`jdbc` and add it to the classpath of your Java application.

The driver is also available from Maven Central:

.. parsed-literal::

    <dependency>
        <groupId>io.trino</groupId>
        <artifactId>trino-jdbc</artifactId>
        <version>\ |version|\ </version>
    </dependency>

We recommend using the latest version of the JDBC driver. A list of all
available versions can be found in the `Maven Central Repository
<https://repo1.maven.org/maven2/io/trino/trino-jdbc/>`_. Navigate to the
directory for the desired version, and select the ``trino-jdbc-xxx.jar`` file
to download, where ``xxx`` is the version number.

Once downloaded, you must add the JAR file to a directory in the classpath
of users on systems where they will access Trino.

After you have downloaded the JDBC driver and added it to your
classpath, you'll typically need to restart your application in order to
recognize the new driver. Then, depending on your application, you
may need to manually register and configure the driver.

The CLI uses the HTTP protocol and the
:doc:`Trino client REST API </develop/client-protocol>` to communicate
with Trino.

Registering and configuring the driver
--------------------------------------

Drivers are commonly loaded automatically by applications once they are added to
its classpath. If your application does not, such as is the case for some
GUI-based SQL editors, read this section. The steps to register the JDBC driver
in a UI or on the command line depend upon the specific application you are
using. Please check your application's documentation.

Once registered, you must also configure the connection information as described
in the following section.

Connecting
----------

When your driver is loaded, registered and configured, you are ready to connect
to Trino from your application. The following JDBC URL formats are supported:

.. code-block:: text

    jdbc:trino://host:port
    jdbc:trino://host:port/catalog
    jdbc:trino://host:port/catalog/schema

The following is an example of a JDBC URL used to create a connection:

.. code-block:: text

    jdbc:trino://example.net:8080/hive/sales

This example JDBC URL locates a Trino instance running on port ``8080`` on
``example.net``, with the catalog ``hive`` and the schema ``sales`` defined.

.. note::

  Typically, the JDBC driver classname is configured automatically by your
  client. If it is not, use ``io.trino.jdbc.TrinoDriver`` wherever a driver
  classname is required.

.. _jdbc-java-connection:

Connection parameters
---------------------

The driver supports various parameters that may be set as URL parameters,
or as properties passed to ``DriverManager``. Both of the following
examples are equivalent:

.. code-block:: java

    // URL parameters
    String url = "jdbc:trino://example.net:8080/hive/sales";
    Properties properties = new Properties();
    properties.setProperty("user", "test");
    properties.setProperty("password", "secret");
    properties.setProperty("SSL", "true");
    Connection connection = DriverManager.getConnection(url, properties);

    // properties
    String url = "jdbc:trino://example.net:8443/hive/sales?user=test&password=secret&SSL=true";
    Connection connection = DriverManager.getConnection(url);

These methods may be mixed; some parameters may be specified in the URL,
while others are specified using properties. However, the same parameter
may not be specified using both methods.

.. _jdbc-parameter-reference:

Parameter reference
-------------------

============================================================ =======================================================================
Name                                                         Description
============================================================ =======================================================================
``user``                                                     Username to use for authentication and authorization.
``password``                                                 Password to use for LDAP authentication.
``sessionUser``                                              Session username override, used for impersonation.
``socksProxy``                                               SOCKS proxy host and port. Example: ``localhost:1080``
``httpProxy``                                                HTTP proxy host and port. Example: ``localhost:8888``
``clientInfo``                                               Extra information about the client.
``clientTags``                                               Client tags for selecting resource groups. Example: ``abc,xyz``
``traceToken``                                               Trace token for correlating requests across systems.
``source``                                                   Source name for the Trino query. This parameter should be used in
                                                             preference to ``ApplicationName``. Thus, it takes precedence
                                                             over ``ApplicationName`` and/or ``applicationNamePrefix``.
``applicationNamePrefix``                                    Prefix to append to any specified ``ApplicationName`` client info
                                                             property, which is used to set the source name for the Trino query
                                                             if the ``source`` parameter has not been set. If neither this
                                                             property nor ``ApplicationName`` or ``source`` are set, the source
                                                             name for the query is ``trino-jdbc``.
``accessToken``                                              :doc:`JWT </security/jwt>` access token for token based authentication.
``SSL``                                                      Set ``true`` to specify using TLS/HTTPS for connections.
``SSLVerification``                                          The method of TLS verification. There are three modes: ``FULL``
                                                             (default), ``CA`` and ``NONE``. For ``FULL``, the normal TLS
                                                             verification is performed. For ``CA``, only the CA is verified but
                                                             hostname mismatch is allowed. For ``NONE``, there is no verification.
``SSLKeyStorePath``                                          Use only when connecting to a Trino cluster that has :doc:`certificate
                                                             authentication </security/certificate>` enabled.
                                                             Specifies the path to a :doc:`PEM </security/inspect-pem>` or :doc:`JKS
                                                             </security/inspect-jks>` file, which must contain a certificate that
                                                             is trusted by the Trino cluster you connect to.
``SSLKeyStorePassword``                                      The password for the KeyStore, if any.
``SSLKeyStoreType``                                          The type of the KeyStore. The default type is provided by the Java
                                                             ``keystore.type`` security property or ``jks`` if none exists.
``SSLTrustStorePath``                                        The location of the Java TrustStore file to use.
                                                             to validate HTTPS server certificates.
``SSLTrustStorePassword``                                    The password for the TrustStore.
``SSLTrustStoreType``                                        The type of the TrustStore. The default type is provided by the Java
                                                             ``keystore.type`` security property or ``jks`` if none exists.
``KerberosRemoteServiceName``                                Trino coordinator Kerberos service name. This parameter is
                                                             required for Kerberos authentication.
``KerberosPrincipal``                                        The principal to use when authenticating to the Trino coordinator.
``KerberosUseCanonicalHostname``                             Use the canonical hostname of the Trino coordinator for the Kerberos
                                                             service principal by first resolving the hostname to an IP address
                                                             and then doing a reverse DNS lookup for that IP address.
                                                             This is enabled by default.
``KerberosServicePrincipalPattern``                          Trino coordinator Kerberos service principal pattern. The default is
                                                             ``${SERVICE}@${HOST}``. ``${SERVICE}`` is replaced with the value of
                                                             ``KerberosRemoteServiceName`` and ``${HOST}`` is replaced with the
                                                             hostname of the coordinator (after canonicalization if enabled).
``KerberosConfigPath``                                       Kerberos configuration file.
``KerberosKeytabPath``                                       Kerberos keytab file.
``KerberosCredentialCachePath``                              Kerberos credential cache.
``KerberosDelegation``                                       Set to ``true`` to use the token from an existing Kerberos context.
                                                             This allows client to use Kerberos authentication without passing
                                                             the Keytab or credential cache. Defaults to ``false``.
``extraCredentials``                                         Extra credentials for connecting to external services,
                                                             specified as a list of key-value pairs. For example,
                                                             ``foo:bar;abc:xyz`` creates the credential named ``abc``
                                                             with value ``xyz`` and the credential named ``foo`` with value ``bar``.
``roles``                                                    Authorization roles to use for catalogs, specified as a list of
                                                             key-value pairs for the catalog and role. For example,
                                                             ``catalog1:roleA;catalog2:roleB`` sets ``roleA``
                                                             for ``catalog1`` and ``roleB`` for ``catalog2``.
``sessionProperties``                                        Session properties to set for the system and for catalogs,
                                                             specified as a list of key-value pairs.
                                                             For example, ``abc:xyz;example.foo:bar`` sets the system property
                                                             ``abc`` to the value ``xyz`` and the ``foo`` property for
                                                             catalog ``example`` to the value ``bar``.
``externalAuthentication``                                   Set to true if you want to use external authentication via
                                                             :doc:`/security/oauth2`. Use a local web browser to authenticate with an
                                                             identity provider (IdP) that has been configured for the Trino coordinator.
``externalAuthenticationTokenCache``                         Allows the sharing of external authentication tokens between different
                                                             connections for the same authenticated user until the cache is
                                                             invalidated, such as when a client is restarted or when the classloader
                                                             reloads the JDBC driver. This is disabled by default, with a value of
                                                             ``NONE``. To enable, set the value to ``MEMORY``. If the JDBC driver is used
                                                             in a shared mode by different users, the first registered token is stored
                                                             and authenticates all users.
``disableCompression``                                       Whether compression should be enabled.
``assumeLiteralNamesInMetadataCallsForNonConformingClients`` When enabled, the name patterns passed to ``DatabaseMetaData`` methods
                                                             are treated as literals. You can use this as a workaround for
                                                             applications that do not escape schema or table names when passing them
                                                             to ``DatabaseMetaData`` methods as schema or table name patterns.
============================================================ =======================================================================

Commit message:

Add use system truststore flag to JDBC driver and CLI
Add a new flag to use the default system truststore instead of manually
specifying one.

When the flag is set to 'true', the client automatically selects the
appropriate system key store based on the machine OS, the keystore
specification can be overridden by using the truststore type parameter
if necessary.

docs/src/main/sphinx/installation/jdbc.rst, after:

===========
JDBC driver
===========

The Trino `JDBC driver <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JDBC_driver>`_ allows
users to access Trino using Java-based applications, and other non-Java
applications running in a JVM. Both desktop and server-side applications, such
as those used for reporting and database development, use the JDBC driver.

Requirements
------------

The Trino JDBC driver has the following requirements:

* Java version 8 or higher.
* All users that connect to Trino with the JDBC driver must be granted access to
  query tables in the ``system.jdbc`` schema.

Installing
----------

Download :maven_download:`jdbc` and add it to the classpath of your Java application.

The driver is also available from Maven Central:

.. parsed-literal::

    <dependency>
        <groupId>io.trino</groupId>
        <artifactId>trino-jdbc</artifactId>
        <version>\ |version|\ </version>
    </dependency>

We recommend using the latest version of the JDBC driver. A list of all
available versions can be found in the `Maven Central Repository
<https://repo1.maven.org/maven2/io/trino/trino-jdbc/>`_. Navigate to the
directory for the desired version, and select the ``trino-jdbc-xxx.jar`` file
to download, where ``xxx`` is the version number.

Once downloaded, you must add the JAR file to a directory in the classpath
of users on systems where they will access Trino.

After you have downloaded the JDBC driver and added it to your
classpath, you'll typically need to restart your application in order to
recognize the new driver. Then, depending on your application, you
may need to manually register and configure the driver.

The CLI uses the HTTP protocol and the
:doc:`Trino client REST API </develop/client-protocol>` to communicate
with Trino.

Registering and configuring the driver
--------------------------------------

Drivers are commonly loaded automatically by applications once they are added to
its classpath. If your application does not, such as is the case for some
GUI-based SQL editors, read this section. The steps to register the JDBC driver
in a UI or on the command line depend upon the specific application you are
using. Please check your application's documentation.

Once registered, you must also configure the connection information as described
in the following section.

Connecting
----------

When your driver is loaded, registered and configured, you are ready to connect
to Trino from your application. The following JDBC URL formats are supported:

.. code-block:: text

    jdbc:trino://host:port
    jdbc:trino://host:port/catalog
    jdbc:trino://host:port/catalog/schema

The following is an example of a JDBC URL used to create a connection:

.. code-block:: text

    jdbc:trino://example.net:8080/hive/sales

This example JDBC URL locates a Trino instance running on port ``8080`` on
``example.net``, with the catalog ``hive`` and the schema ``sales`` defined.

.. note::

  Typically, the JDBC driver classname is configured automatically by your
  client. If it is not, use ``io.trino.jdbc.TrinoDriver`` wherever a driver
  classname is required.

.. _jdbc-java-connection:

Connection parameters
---------------------

The driver supports various parameters that may be set as URL parameters,
or as properties passed to ``DriverManager``. Both of the following
examples are equivalent:

.. code-block:: java

    // URL parameters
    String url = "jdbc:trino://example.net:8080/hive/sales";
    Properties properties = new Properties();
    properties.setProperty("user", "test");
    properties.setProperty("password", "secret");
    properties.setProperty("SSL", "true");
    Connection connection = DriverManager.getConnection(url, properties);

    // properties
    String url = "jdbc:trino://example.net:8443/hive/sales?user=test&password=secret&SSL=true";
    Connection connection = DriverManager.getConnection(url);

These methods may be mixed; some parameters may be specified in the URL,
while others are specified using properties. However, the same parameter
may not be specified using both methods.

.. _jdbc-parameter-reference:

Parameter reference
-------------------

============================================================ =======================================================================
Name                                                         Description
============================================================ =======================================================================
``user``                                                     Username to use for authentication and authorization.
``password``                                                 Password to use for LDAP authentication.
``sessionUser``                                              Session username override, used for impersonation.
``socksProxy``                                               SOCKS proxy host and port. Example: ``localhost:1080``
``httpProxy``                                                HTTP proxy host and port. Example: ``localhost:8888``
``clientInfo``                                               Extra information about the client.
``clientTags``                                               Client tags for selecting resource groups. Example: ``abc,xyz``
``traceToken``                                               Trace token for correlating requests across systems.
``source``                                                   Source name for the Trino query. This parameter should be used in
                                                             preference to ``ApplicationName``. Thus, it takes precedence
                                                             over ``ApplicationName`` and/or ``applicationNamePrefix``.
``applicationNamePrefix``                                    Prefix to append to any specified ``ApplicationName`` client info
                                                             property, which is used to set the source name for the Trino query
                                                             if the ``source`` parameter has not been set. If neither this
                                                             property nor ``ApplicationName`` or ``source`` are set, the source
                                                             name for the query is ``trino-jdbc``.
``accessToken``                                              :doc:`JWT </security/jwt>` access token for token based authentication.
``SSL``                                                      Set ``true`` to specify using TLS/HTTPS for connections.
``SSLVerification``                                          The method of TLS verification. There are three modes: ``FULL``
                                                             (default), ``CA`` and ``NONE``. For ``FULL``, the normal TLS
                                                             verification is performed. For ``CA``, only the CA is verified but
                                                             hostname mismatch is allowed. For ``NONE``, there is no verification.
``SSLKeyStorePath``                                          Use only when connecting to a Trino cluster that has :doc:`certificate
                                                             authentication </security/certificate>` enabled.
                                                             Specifies the path to a :doc:`PEM </security/inspect-pem>` or :doc:`JKS
                                                             </security/inspect-jks>` file, which must contain a certificate that
                                                             is trusted by the Trino cluster you connect to.
``SSLKeyStorePassword``                                      The password for the KeyStore, if any.
``SSLKeyStoreType``                                          The type of the KeyStore. The default type is provided by the Java
                                                             ``keystore.type`` security property or ``jks`` if none exists.
``SSLTrustStorePath``                                        The location of the Java TrustStore file to use.
                                                             to validate HTTPS server certificates.
``SSLTrustStorePassword``                                    The password for the TrustStore.
``SSLTrustStoreType``                                        The type of the TrustStore. The default type is provided by the Java
                                                             ``keystore.type`` security property or ``jks`` if none exists.
``SSLUseSystemTrustStore``                                   Set ``true`` to automatically use the system TrustStore based on the operating system.
                                                             The TrustStore specification can be overridden using ``SSLTrustStoreType``.
``KerberosRemoteServiceName``                                Trino coordinator Kerberos service name. This parameter is
                                                             required for Kerberos authentication.
``KerberosPrincipal``                                        The principal to use when authenticating to the Trino coordinator.
``KerberosUseCanonicalHostname``                             Use the canonical hostname of the Trino coordinator for the Kerberos
                                                             service principal by first resolving the hostname to an IP address
                                                             and then doing a reverse DNS lookup for that IP address.
                                                             This is enabled by default.
``KerberosServicePrincipalPattern``                          Trino coordinator Kerberos service principal pattern. The default is
                                                             ``${SERVICE}@${HOST}``. ``${SERVICE}`` is replaced with the value of
                                                             ``KerberosRemoteServiceName`` and ``${HOST}`` is replaced with the
                                                             hostname of the coordinator (after canonicalization if enabled).
``KerberosConfigPath``                                       Kerberos configuration file.
``KerberosKeytabPath``                                       Kerberos keytab file.
``KerberosCredentialCachePath``                              Kerberos credential cache.
``KerberosDelegation``                                       Set to ``true`` to use the token from an existing Kerberos context.
                                                             This allows client to use Kerberos authentication without passing
                                                             the Keytab or credential cache. Defaults to ``false``.
``extraCredentials``                                         Extra credentials for connecting to external services,
                                                             specified as a list of key-value pairs. For example,
                                                             ``foo:bar;abc:xyz`` creates the credential named ``abc``
                                                             with value ``xyz`` and the credential named ``foo`` with value ``bar``.
``roles``                                                    Authorization roles to use for catalogs, specified as a list of
                                                             key-value pairs for the catalog and role. For example,
                                                             ``catalog1:roleA;catalog2:roleB`` sets ``roleA``
                                                             for ``catalog1`` and ``roleB`` for ``catalog2``.
``sessionProperties``                                        Session properties to set for the system and for catalogs,
                                                             specified as a list of key-value pairs.
                                                             For example, ``abc:xyz;example.foo:bar`` sets the system property
                                                             ``abc`` to the value ``xyz`` and the ``foo`` property for
                                                             catalog ``example`` to the value ``bar``.
``externalAuthentication``                                   Set to true if you want to use external authentication via
                                                             :doc:`/security/oauth2`. Use a local web browser to authenticate with an
                                                             identity provider (IdP) that has been configured for the Trino coordinator.
``externalAuthenticationTokenCache``                         Allows the sharing of external authentication tokens between different
                                                             connections for the same authenticated user until the cache is
                                                             invalidated, such as when a client is restarted or when the classloader
                                                             reloads the JDBC driver. This is disabled by default, with a value of
                                                             ``NONE``. To enable, set the value to ``MEMORY``. If the JDBC driver is used
                                                             in a shared mode by different users, the first registered token is stored
                                                             and authenticates all users.
``disableCompression``                                       Whether compression should be enabled.
``assumeLiteralNamesInMetadataCallsForNonConformingClients`` When enabled, the name patterns passed to ``DatabaseMetaData`` methods
                                                             are treated as literals. You can use this as a workaround for
                                                             applications that do not escape schema or table names when passing them
                                                             to ``DatabaseMetaData`` methods as schema or table name patterns.
============================================================ =======================================================================
