docs/src/main/sphinx/connector/memsql.rst, before:

==============================
SingleStore (MemSQL) connector
==============================

.. raw:: html

  <img src="../_static/img/singlestore.png" class="connector-logo">

The SingleStore (formerly known as MemSQL) connector allows querying and
creating tables in an external SingleStore database.

Requirements
------------

To connect to SingleStore, you need:

* SingleStore version 7.1.4 or higher.
* Network access from the Trino coordinator and workers to SingleStore. Port
  3306 is the default port.

.. _singlestore-configuration:

Configuration
-------------

To configure the SingleStore connector, create a catalog properties file
in ``etc/catalog`` named, for example, ``singlestore.properties``, to
mount the SingleStore connector as the ``singlestore`` catalog.
Create the file with the following contents, replacing the
connection properties as appropriate for your setup:

.. code-block:: text

    connector.name=singlestore
    connection-url=jdbc:singlestore://example.net:3306
    connection-user=root
    connection-password=secret

The ``connection-url`` defines the connection information and parameters to pass
to the SingleStore JDBC driver. The supported parameters for the URL are
available in the `SingleStore JDBC driver documentation
<https://docs.singlestore.com/db/v7.6/en/developer-resources/connect-with-application-development-tools/connect-with-java-jdbc/the-singlestore-jdbc-driver.html#connection-string-parameters>`_.

The ``connection-user`` and ``connection-password`` are typically required and
determine the user credentials for the connection, often a service user. You can
use :doc:`secrets </security/secrets>` to avoid actual values in the catalog
properties files.


.. _singlestore-tls:

Connection security
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you have TLS configured with a globally-trusted certificate installed on your
data source, you can enable TLS between your cluster and the data
source by appending a parameter to the JDBC connection string set in the
``connection-url`` catalog configuration property.

Enable TLS between your cluster and SingleStore by appending the ``useSsl=true``
parameter to the ``connection-url`` configuration property:

.. code-block:: properties

  connection-url=jdbc:singlestore://example.net:3306/?useSsl=true

For more information on TLS configuration options, see the `JDBC driver
documentation <https://docs.singlestore.com/db/v7.6/en/developer-resources/connect-with-application-development-tools/connect-with-java-jdbc/the-singlestore-jdbc-driver.html#tls-parameters>`_.

Multiple SingleStore servers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You can have as many catalogs as you need, so if you have additional
SingleStore servers, simply add another properties file to ``etc/catalog``
with a different name (making sure it ends in ``.properties``). For
example, if you name the property file ``sales.properties``, Trino
will create a catalog named ``sales`` using the configured connector.

.. include:: jdbc-common-configurations.fragment

.. include:: jdbc-procedures.fragment

.. include:: jdbc-case-insensitive-matching.fragment

.. include:: non-transactional-insert.fragment

Querying SingleStore
--------------------

The SingleStore connector provides a schema for every SingleStore *database*.
You can see the available SingleStore databases by running ``SHOW SCHEMAS``::

    SHOW SCHEMAS FROM singlestore;

If you have a SingleStore database named ``web``, you can view the tables
in this database by running ``SHOW TABLES``::

    SHOW TABLES FROM singlestore.web;

You can see a list of the columns in the ``clicks`` table in the ``web``
database using either of the following::

    DESCRIBE singlestore.web.clicks;
    SHOW COLUMNS FROM singlestore.web.clicks;

Finally, you can access the ``clicks`` table in the ``web`` database::

    SELECT * FROM singlestore.web.clicks;

If you used a different name for your catalog properties file, use
that catalog name instead of ``singlestore`` in the above examples.

.. _singlestore-type-mapping:

Type mapping
------------

.. include:: jdbc-type-mapping.fragment

.. _singlestore-pushdown:

Pushdown
--------

The connector supports pushdown for a number of operations:

* :ref:`join-pushdown`
* :ref:`limit-pushdown`
* :ref:`topn-pushdown`

.. include:: no-pushdown-text-type.fragment

.. _singlestore-sql-support:

SQL support
-----------

The connector provides read access and write access to data and metadata in
a SingleStore database.  In addition to the :ref:`globally available
<sql-globally-available>` and :ref:`read operation <sql-read-operations>`
statements, the connector supports the following features:

* :doc:`/sql/insert`
* :doc:`/sql/delete`
* :doc:`/sql/truncate`
* :doc:`/sql/create-table`
* :doc:`/sql/create-table-as`
* :doc:`/sql/drop-table`
* :doc:`/sql/alter-table`
* :doc:`/sql/create-schema`
* :doc:`/sql/drop-schema`

.. include:: sql-delete-limitation.fragment

.. include:: alter-table-limitation.fragment

Commit message:

add docs for jdbc extra credentials, fixing #1910

docs/src/main/sphinx/connector/memsql.rst, after:

==============================
SingleStore (MemSQL) connector
==============================

.. raw:: html

  <img src="../_static/img/singlestore.png" class="connector-logo">

The SingleStore (formerly known as MemSQL) connector allows querying and
creating tables in an external SingleStore database.

Requirements
------------

To connect to SingleStore, you need:

* SingleStore version 7.1.4 or higher.
* Network access from the Trino coordinator and workers to SingleStore. Port
  3306 is the default port.

.. _singlestore-configuration:

Configuration
-------------

To configure the SingleStore connector, create a catalog properties file
in ``etc/catalog`` named, for example, ``singlestore.properties``, to
mount the SingleStore connector as the ``singlestore`` catalog.
Create the file with the following contents, replacing the
connection properties as appropriate for your setup:

.. code-block:: text

    connector.name=singlestore
    connection-url=jdbc:singlestore://example.net:3306
    connection-user=root
    connection-password=secret

The ``connection-url`` defines the connection information and parameters to pass
to the SingleStore JDBC driver. The supported parameters for the URL are
available in the `SingleStore JDBC driver documentation
<https://docs.singlestore.com/db/v7.6/en/developer-resources/connect-with-application-development-tools/connect-with-java-jdbc/the-singlestore-jdbc-driver.html#connection-string-parameters>`_.

The ``connection-user`` and ``connection-password`` are typically required and
determine the user credentials for the connection, often a service user. 

.. include:: jdbc-extra-credentials.fragment

You can also use other solutions mentioned in :doc:`secrets </security/secrets>` 
to avoid actual values in the catalog properties files.

.. _singlestore-tls:

Connection security
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you have TLS configured with a globally-trusted certificate installed on your
data source, you can enable TLS between your cluster and the data
source by appending a parameter to the JDBC connection string set in the
``connection-url`` catalog configuration property.

Enable TLS between your cluster and SingleStore by appending the ``useSsl=true``
parameter to the ``connection-url`` configuration property:

.. code-block:: properties

  connection-url=jdbc:singlestore://example.net:3306/?useSsl=true

For more information on TLS configuration options, see the `JDBC driver
documentation <https://docs.singlestore.com/db/v7.6/en/developer-resources/connect-with-application-development-tools/connect-with-java-jdbc/the-singlestore-jdbc-driver.html#tls-parameters>`_.

Multiple SingleStore servers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You can have as many catalogs as you need, so if you have additional
SingleStore servers, simply add another properties file to ``etc/catalog``
with a different name (making sure it ends in ``.properties``). For
example, if you name the property file ``sales.properties``, Trino
will create a catalog named ``sales`` using the configured connector.

.. include:: jdbc-common-configurations.fragment

.. include:: jdbc-procedures.fragment

.. include:: jdbc-case-insensitive-matching.fragment

.. include:: non-transactional-insert.fragment

Querying SingleStore
--------------------

The SingleStore connector provides a schema for every SingleStore *database*.
You can see the available SingleStore databases by running ``SHOW SCHEMAS``::

    SHOW SCHEMAS FROM singlestore;

If you have a SingleStore database named ``web``, you can view the tables
in this database by running ``SHOW TABLES``::

    SHOW TABLES FROM singlestore.web;

You can see a list of the columns in the ``clicks`` table in the ``web``
database using either of the following::

    DESCRIBE singlestore.web.clicks;
    SHOW COLUMNS FROM singlestore.web.clicks;

Finally, you can access the ``clicks`` table in the ``web`` database::

    SELECT * FROM singlestore.web.clicks;

If you used a different name for your catalog properties file, use
that catalog name instead of ``singlestore`` in the above examples.

.. _singlestore-type-mapping:

Type mapping
------------

.. include:: jdbc-type-mapping.fragment

.. _singlestore-pushdown:

Pushdown
--------

The connector supports pushdown for a number of operations:

* :ref:`join-pushdown`
* :ref:`limit-pushdown`
* :ref:`topn-pushdown`

.. include:: no-pushdown-text-type.fragment

.. _singlestore-sql-support:

SQL support
-----------

The connector provides read access and write access to data and metadata in
a SingleStore database.  In addition to the :ref:`globally available
<sql-globally-available>` and :ref:`read operation <sql-read-operations>`
statements, the connector supports the following features:

* :doc:`/sql/insert`
* :doc:`/sql/delete`
* :doc:`/sql/truncate`
* :doc:`/sql/create-table`
* :doc:`/sql/create-table-as`
* :doc:`/sql/drop-table`
* :doc:`/sql/alter-table`
* :doc:`/sql/create-schema`
* :doc:`/sql/drop-schema`

.. include:: sql-delete-limitation.fragment

.. include:: alter-table-limitation.fragment
