docs/src/main/sphinx/functions/array.rst, before:

=============================
Array functions and operators
=============================

.. _subscript-operator:

Subscript operator: []
----------------------

The ``[]`` operator is used to access an element of an array and is indexed starting from one::

    SELECT my_array[1] AS first_element

.. _concatenation-operator:

Concatenation operator: ||
--------------------------

The ``||`` operator is used to concatenate an array with an array or an element of the same type::

    SELECT ARRAY[1] || ARRAY[2];
    -- [1, 2]

    SELECT ARRAY[1] || 2;
    -- [1, 2]

    SELECT 2 || ARRAY[1];
    -- [2, 1]

Array functions
---------------

.. function:: all_match(array(T), function(T,boolean)) -> boolean

    Returns whether all elements of an array match the given predicate. Returns ``true`` if all the elements
    match the predicate (a special case is when the array is empty); ``false`` if one or more elements don't
    match; ``NULL`` if the predicate function returns ``NULL`` for one or more elements and ``true`` for all
    other elements.

.. function:: any_match(array(T), function(T,boolean)) -> boolean

    Returns whether any elements of an array match the given predicate. Returns ``true`` if one or more
    elements match the predicate; ``false`` if none of the elements matches (a special case is when the
    array is empty); ``NULL`` if the predicate function returns ``NULL`` for one or more elements and ``false``
    for all other elements.

.. function:: array_distinct(x) -> array

    Remove duplicate values from the array ``x``.

.. function:: array_intersect(x, y) -> array

    Returns an array of the elements in the intersection of ``x`` and ``y``, without duplicates.

.. function:: array_union(x, y) -> array

    Returns an array of the elements in the union of ``x`` and ``y``, without duplicates.

.. function:: array_except(x, y) -> array

    Returns an array of elements in ``x`` but not in ``y``, without duplicates.

.. function:: array_histogram(x) -> map<K, bigint>

    Returns a map where the keys are the unique elements in the input array
    ``x`` and the values are the number of times that each element appears in
    ``x``. Null values are ignored. ::

        SELECT array_histogram(ARRAY[42, 7, 42, NULL]);
        -- {42=2, 7=1}

    Returns an empty map if the input array has no non-null elements. ::

        SELECT array_histogram(ARRAY[NULL, NULL]);
        -- {}

.. function:: array_join(x, delimiter, null_replacement) -> varchar

    Concatenates the elements of the given array using the delimiter and an optional string to replace nulls.

.. function:: array_max(x) -> x

    Returns the maximum value of input array.

.. function:: array_min(x) -> x

    Returns the minimum value of input array.

.. function:: array_position(x, element) -> bigint

    Returns the position of the first occurrence of the ``element`` in array ``x`` (or 0 if not found).

.. function:: array_remove(x, element) -> array

    Remove all elements that equal ``element`` from array ``x``.

.. function:: array_sort(x) -> array

    Sorts and returns the array ``x``. The elements of ``x`` must be orderable.
    Null elements will be placed at the end of the returned array.

.. function:: array_sort(array(T), function(T,T,int)) -> array(T)
    :noindex:

    Sorts and returns the ``array`` based on the given comparator ``function``.
    The comparator will take two nullable arguments representing two nullable
    elements of the ``array``. It returns -1, 0, or 1 as the first nullable
    element is less than, equal to, or greater than the second nullable element.
    If the comparator function returns other values (including ``NULL``), the
    query will fail and raise an error. ::

        SELECT array_sort(ARRAY[3, 2, 5, 1, 2],
                          (x, y) -> IF(x < y, 1, IF(x = y, 0, -1)));
        -- [5, 3, 2, 2, 1]

        SELECT array_sort(ARRAY['bc', 'ab', 'dc'],
                          (x, y) -> IF(x < y, 1, IF(x = y, 0, -1)));
        -- ['dc', 'bc', 'ab']


        SELECT array_sort(ARRAY[3, 2, null, 5, null, 1, 2],
                          -- sort null first with descending order
                          (x, y) -> CASE WHEN x IS NULL THEN -1
                                         WHEN y IS NULL THEN 1
                                         WHEN x < y THEN 1
                                         WHEN x = y THEN 0
                                         ELSE -1 END);
        -- [null, null, 5, 3, 2, 2, 1]

        SELECT array_sort(ARRAY[3, 2, null, 5, null, 1, 2],
                          -- sort null last with descending order
                          (x, y) -> CASE WHEN x IS NULL THEN 1
                                         WHEN y IS NULL THEN -1
                                         WHEN x < y THEN 1
                                         WHEN x = y THEN 0
                                         ELSE -1 END);
        -- [5, 3, 2, 2, 1, null, null]

        SELECT array_sort(ARRAY['a', 'abcd', 'abc'],
                          -- sort by string length
                          (x, y) -> IF(length(x) < length(y), -1,
                                       IF(length(x) = length(y), 0, 1)));
        -- ['a', 'abc', 'abcd']

        SELECT array_sort(ARRAY[ARRAY[2, 3, 1], ARRAY[4, 2, 1, 4], ARRAY[1, 2]],
                          -- sort by array length
                          (x, y) -> IF(cardinality(x) < cardinality(y), -1,
                                       IF(cardinality(x) = cardinality(y), 0, 1)));
        -- [[1, 2], [2, 3, 1], [4, 2, 1, 4]]

.. function:: arrays_overlap(x, y) -> boolean

    Tests if arrays ``x`` and ``y`` have any non-null elements in common.
    Returns null if there are no non-null elements in common but either array contains null.

.. function:: cardinality(x) -> bigint

    Returns the cardinality (size) of the array ``x``.

.. function:: concat(array1, array2, ..., arrayN) -> array
    :noindex:

    Concatenates the arrays ``array1``, ``array2``, ``...``, ``arrayN``.
    This function provides the same functionality as the SQL-standard concatenation operator (``||``).

.. function:: combinations(array(T), n) -> array(array(T))

    Returns n-element sub-groups of input array. If the input array has no duplicates,
    ``combinations`` returns n-element subsets. ::

         SELECT combinations(ARRAY['foo', 'bar', 'baz'], 2);
         -- [['foo', 'bar'], ['foo', 'baz'], ['bar', 'baz']]

         SELECT combinations(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], 2);
         -- [[1, 2], [1, 3], [2, 3]]

         SELECT combinations(ARRAY[1, 2, 2], 2);
         -- [[1, 2], [1, 2], [2, 2]]

    Order of sub-groups is deterministic but unspecified. Order of elements within
    a sub-group deterministic but unspecified. ``n`` must be not be greater than 5,
    and the total size of sub-groups generated must be smaller than 100,000.

.. function:: contains(x, element) -> boolean

    Returns true if the array ``x`` contains the ``element``.

.. function:: contains_sequence(x, seq) -> boolean

    Return true if array ``x`` contains all of array ``seq`` as a subsequence (all values in the same consecutive order).

.. function:: element_at(array(E), index) -> E

    Returns element of ``array`` at given ``index``.
    If ``index`` > 0, this function provides the same functionality as the SQL-standard subscript operator (``[]``),
    except that the function returns ``NULL`` when accessing an ``index`` larger than array length, whereas
    the subscript operator would fail in such a case.
    If ``index`` < 0, ``element_at`` accesses elements from the last to the first.

.. function:: filter(array(T), function(T,boolean)) -> array(T)

    Constructs an array from those elements of ``array`` for which ``function`` returns true::

        SELECT filter(ARRAY[], x -> true);
        -- []

        SELECT filter(ARRAY[5, -6, NULL, 7], x -> x > 0);
        -- [5, 7]

        SELECT filter(ARRAY[5, NULL, 7, NULL], x -> x IS NOT NULL);
        -- [5, 7]

.. function:: flatten(x) -> array

    Flattens an ``array(array(T))`` to an ``array(T)`` by concatenating the contained arrays.

.. function:: ngrams(array(T), n) -> array(array(T))

    Returns ``n``-grams (sub-sequences of adjacent ``n`` elements) for the ``array``.
    The order of the ``n``-grams in the result is unspecified. ::

        SELECT ngrams(ARRAY['foo', 'bar', 'baz', 'foo'], 2);
        -- [['foo', 'bar'], ['bar', 'baz'], ['baz', 'foo']]

        SELECT ngrams(ARRAY['foo', 'bar', 'baz', 'foo'], 3);
        -- [['foo', 'bar', 'baz'], ['bar', 'baz', 'foo']]

        SELECT ngrams(ARRAY['foo', 'bar', 'baz', 'foo'], 4);
        -- [['foo', 'bar', 'baz', 'foo']]

        SELECT ngrams(ARRAY['foo', 'bar', 'baz', 'foo'], 5);
        -- [['foo', 'bar', 'baz', 'foo']]

        SELECT ngrams(ARRAY[1, 2, 3, 4], 2);
        -- [[1, 2], [2, 3], [3, 4]]

.. function:: none_match(array(T), function(T,boolean)) -> boolean

    Returns whether no elements of an array match the given predicate. Returns ``true`` if none of the elements
    matches the predicate (a special case is when the array is empty); ``false`` if one or more elements match;
    ``NULL`` if the predicate function returns ``NULL`` for one or more elements and ``false`` for all other elements.

.. function:: reduce(array(T), initialState S, inputFunction(S,T,S), outputFunction(S,R)) -> R

    Returns a single value reduced from ``array``. ``inputFunction`` will
    be invoked for each element in ``array`` in order. In addition to taking
    the element, ``inputFunction`` takes the current state, initially
    ``initialState``, and returns the new state. ``outputFunction`` will be
    invoked to turn the final state into the result value. It may be the
    identity function (``i -> i``). ::

        SELECT reduce(ARRAY[], 0,
                      (s, x) -> s + x,
                      s -> s);
        -- 0

        SELECT reduce(ARRAY[5, 20, 50], 0,
                      (s, x) -> s + x,
                      s -> s);
        -- 75

        SELECT reduce(ARRAY[5, 20, NULL, 50], 0,
                      (s, x) -> s + x,
                      s -> s);
        -- NULL

        SELECT reduce(ARRAY[5, 20, NULL, 50], 0,
                      (s, x) -> s + coalesce(x, 0),
                      s -> s);
        -- 75

        SELECT reduce(ARRAY[5, 20, NULL, 50], 0,
                      (s, x) -> IF(x IS NULL, s, s + x),
                      s -> s);
        -- 75

        SELECT reduce(ARRAY[2147483647, 1], BIGINT '0',
                      (s, x) -> s + x,
                      s -> s);
        -- 2147483648

        -- calculates arithmetic average
        SELECT reduce(ARRAY[5, 6, 10, 20],
                      CAST(ROW(0.0, 0) AS ROW(sum DOUBLE, count INTEGER)),
                      (s, x) -> CAST(ROW(x + s.sum, s.count + 1) AS
                                     ROW(sum DOUBLE, count INTEGER)),
                      s -> IF(s.count = 0, NULL, s.sum / s.count));
        -- 10.25

.. function:: repeat(element, count) -> array

    Repeat ``element`` for ``count`` times.

.. function:: reverse(x) -> array
    :noindex:

    Returns an array which has the reversed order of array ``x``.

.. function:: sequence(start, stop) -> array(bigint)

    Generate a sequence of integers from ``start`` to ``stop``, incrementing
    by ``1`` if ``start`` is less than or equal to ``stop``, otherwise ``-1``.

.. function:: sequence(start, stop, step) -> array(bigint)
    :noindex:

    Generate a sequence of integers from ``start`` to ``stop``, incrementing by ``step``.

.. function:: sequence(start, stop) -> array(date)
    :noindex:

    Generate a sequence of dates from ``start`` date to ``stop`` date, incrementing
    by ``1`` day if ``start`` date is less than or equal to ``stop`` date, otherwise ``-1`` day.

.. function:: sequence(start, stop, step) -> array(date)
    :noindex:

    Generate a sequence of dates from ``start`` to ``stop``, incrementing by ``step``.
    The type of ``step`` can be either ``INTERVAL DAY TO SECOND`` or ``INTERVAL YEAR TO MONTH``.

.. function:: sequence(start, stop, step) -> array(timestamp)
    :noindex:

    Generate a sequence of timestamps from ``start`` to ``stop``, incrementing by ``step``.
    The type of ``step`` can be either ``INTERVAL DAY TO SECOND`` or ``INTERVAL YEAR TO MONTH``.

.. function:: shuffle(x) -> array

    Generate a random permutation of the given array ``x``.

.. function:: slice(x, start, length) -> array

    Subsets array ``x`` starting from index ``start`` (or starting from the end
    if ``start`` is negative) with a length of ``length``.

.. function:: trim_array(x, n) -> array

    Remove ``n`` elements from the end of array::

        SELECT trim_array(ARRAY[1, 2, 3, 4], 1);
        -- [1, 2, 3]

        SELECT trim_array(ARRAY[1, 2, 3, 4], 2);
        -- [1, 2]

.. function:: transform(array(T), function(T,U)) -> array(U)

    Returns an array that is the result of applying ``function`` to each element of ``array``::

        SELECT transform(ARRAY[], x -> x + 1);
        -- []

        SELECT transform(ARRAY[5, 6], x -> x + 1);
        -- [6, 7]

        SELECT transform(ARRAY[5, NULL, 6], x -> coalesce(x, 0) + 1);
        -- [6, 1, 7]

        SELECT transform(ARRAY['x', 'abc', 'z'], x -> x || '0');
        -- ['x0', 'abc0', 'z0']

        SELECT transform(ARRAY[ARRAY[1, NULL, 2], ARRAY[3, NULL]],
                         a -> filter(a, x -> x IS NOT NULL));
        -- [[1, 2], [3]]

.. function:: zip(array1, array2[, ...]) -> array(row)

    Merges the given arrays, element-wise, into a single array of rows. The M-th element of
    the N-th argument will be the N-th field of the M-th output element.
    If the arguments have an uneven length, missing values are filled with ``NULL``. ::

        SELECT zip(ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY['1b', null, '3b']);
        -- [ROW(1, '1b'), ROW(2, null), ROW(null, '3b')]

.. function:: zip_with(array(T), array(U), function(T,U,R)) -> array(R)

    Merges the two given arrays, element-wise, into a single array using ``function``.
    If one array is shorter, nulls are appended at the end to match the length of the
    longer array, before applying ``function``. ::

        SELECT zip_with(ARRAY[1, 3, 5], ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'],
                        (x, y) -> (y, x));
        -- [ROW('a', 1), ROW('b', 3), ROW('c', 5)]

        SELECT zip_with(ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY[3, 4],
                        (x, y) -> x + y);
        -- [4, 6]

        SELECT zip_with(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY['d', 'e', 'f'],
                        (x, y) -> concat(x, y));
        -- ['ad', 'be', 'cf']

        SELECT zip_with(ARRAY['a'], ARRAY['d', null, 'f'],
                        (x, y) -> coalesce(x, y));
        -- ['a', null, 'f']

Commit message:

Added documentation for array_join(x, delimiter)
array_join(x, delimiter, null_replacement) was in the docs, but array_join(x, delimiter) was not.

docs/src/main/sphinx/functions/array.rst, after:

=============================
Array functions and operators
=============================

.. _subscript-operator:

Subscript operator: []
----------------------

The ``[]`` operator is used to access an element of an array and is indexed starting from one::

    SELECT my_array[1] AS first_element

.. _concatenation-operator:

Concatenation operator: ||
--------------------------

The ``||`` operator is used to concatenate an array with an array or an element of the same type::

    SELECT ARRAY[1] || ARRAY[2];
    -- [1, 2]

    SELECT ARRAY[1] || 2;
    -- [1, 2]

    SELECT 2 || ARRAY[1];
    -- [2, 1]

Array functions
---------------

.. function:: all_match(array(T), function(T,boolean)) -> boolean

    Returns whether all elements of an array match the given predicate. Returns ``true`` if all the elements
    match the predicate (a special case is when the array is empty); ``false`` if one or more elements don't
    match; ``NULL`` if the predicate function returns ``NULL`` for one or more elements and ``true`` for all
    other elements.

.. function:: any_match(array(T), function(T,boolean)) -> boolean

    Returns whether any elements of an array match the given predicate. Returns ``true`` if one or more
    elements match the predicate; ``false`` if none of the elements matches (a special case is when the
    array is empty); ``NULL`` if the predicate function returns ``NULL`` for one or more elements and ``false``
    for all other elements.

.. function:: array_distinct(x) -> array

    Remove duplicate values from the array ``x``.

.. function:: array_intersect(x, y) -> array

    Returns an array of the elements in the intersection of ``x`` and ``y``, without duplicates.

.. function:: array_union(x, y) -> array

    Returns an array of the elements in the union of ``x`` and ``y``, without duplicates.

.. function:: array_except(x, y) -> array

    Returns an array of elements in ``x`` but not in ``y``, without duplicates.

.. function:: array_histogram(x) -> map<K, bigint>

    Returns a map where the keys are the unique elements in the input array
    ``x`` and the values are the number of times that each element appears in
    ``x``. Null values are ignored. ::

        SELECT array_histogram(ARRAY[42, 7, 42, NULL]);
        -- {42=2, 7=1}

    Returns an empty map if the input array has no non-null elements. ::

        SELECT array_histogram(ARRAY[NULL, NULL]);
        -- {}

.. function:: array_join(x, delimiter, null_replacement) -> varchar

    Concatenates the elements of the given array using the delimiter and an optional string to replace nulls.
    
.. function:: array_join(x, delimiter) -> varchar

    Concatenates the elements of the given array using the delimiter. Does not replace nulls.

.. function:: array_max(x) -> x

    Returns the maximum value of input array.

.. function:: array_min(x) -> x

    Returns the minimum value of input array.

.. function:: array_position(x, element) -> bigint

    Returns the position of the first occurrence of the ``element`` in array ``x`` (or 0 if not found).

.. function:: array_remove(x, element) -> array

    Remove all elements that equal ``element`` from array ``x``.

.. function:: array_sort(x) -> array

    Sorts and returns the array ``x``. The elements of ``x`` must be orderable.
    Null elements will be placed at the end of the returned array.

.. function:: array_sort(array(T), function(T,T,int)) -> array(T)
    :noindex:

    Sorts and returns the ``array`` based on the given comparator ``function``.
    The comparator will take two nullable arguments representing two nullable
    elements of the ``array``. It returns -1, 0, or 1 as the first nullable
    element is less than, equal to, or greater than the second nullable element.
    If the comparator function returns other values (including ``NULL``), the
    query will fail and raise an error. ::

        SELECT array_sort(ARRAY[3, 2, 5, 1, 2],
                          (x, y) -> IF(x < y, 1, IF(x = y, 0, -1)));
        -- [5, 3, 2, 2, 1]

        SELECT array_sort(ARRAY['bc', 'ab', 'dc'],
                          (x, y) -> IF(x < y, 1, IF(x = y, 0, -1)));
        -- ['dc', 'bc', 'ab']


        SELECT array_sort(ARRAY[3, 2, null, 5, null, 1, 2],
                          -- sort null first with descending order
                          (x, y) -> CASE WHEN x IS NULL THEN -1
                                         WHEN y IS NULL THEN 1
                                         WHEN x < y THEN 1
                                         WHEN x = y THEN 0
                                         ELSE -1 END);
        -- [null, null, 5, 3, 2, 2, 1]

        SELECT array_sort(ARRAY[3, 2, null, 5, null, 1, 2],
                          -- sort null last with descending order
                          (x, y) -> CASE WHEN x IS NULL THEN 1
                                         WHEN y IS NULL THEN -1
                                         WHEN x < y THEN 1
                                         WHEN x = y THEN 0
                                         ELSE -1 END);
        -- [5, 3, 2, 2, 1, null, null]

        SELECT array_sort(ARRAY['a', 'abcd', 'abc'],
                          -- sort by string length
                          (x, y) -> IF(length(x) < length(y), -1,
                                       IF(length(x) = length(y), 0, 1)));
        -- ['a', 'abc', 'abcd']

        SELECT array_sort(ARRAY[ARRAY[2, 3, 1], ARRAY[4, 2, 1, 4], ARRAY[1, 2]],
                          -- sort by array length
                          (x, y) -> IF(cardinality(x) < cardinality(y), -1,
                                       IF(cardinality(x) = cardinality(y), 0, 1)));
        -- [[1, 2], [2, 3, 1], [4, 2, 1, 4]]

.. function:: arrays_overlap(x, y) -> boolean

    Tests if arrays ``x`` and ``y`` have any non-null elements in common.
    Returns null if there are no non-null elements in common but either array contains null.

.. function:: cardinality(x) -> bigint

    Returns the cardinality (size) of the array ``x``.

.. function:: concat(array1, array2, ..., arrayN) -> array
    :noindex:

    Concatenates the arrays ``array1``, ``array2``, ``...``, ``arrayN``.
    This function provides the same functionality as the SQL-standard concatenation operator (``||``).

.. function:: combinations(array(T), n) -> array(array(T))

    Returns n-element sub-groups of input array. If the input array has no duplicates,
    ``combinations`` returns n-element subsets. ::

         SELECT combinations(ARRAY['foo', 'bar', 'baz'], 2);
         -- [['foo', 'bar'], ['foo', 'baz'], ['bar', 'baz']]

         SELECT combinations(ARRAY[1, 2, 3], 2);
         -- [[1, 2], [1, 3], [2, 3]]

         SELECT combinations(ARRAY[1, 2, 2], 2);
         -- [[1, 2], [1, 2], [2, 2]]

    Order of sub-groups is deterministic but unspecified. Order of elements within
    a sub-group deterministic but unspecified. ``n`` must be not be greater than 5,
    and the total size of sub-groups generated must be smaller than 100,000.

.. function:: contains(x, element) -> boolean

    Returns true if the array ``x`` contains the ``element``.

.. function:: contains_sequence(x, seq) -> boolean

    Return true if array ``x`` contains all of array ``seq`` as a subsequence (all values in the same consecutive order).

.. function:: element_at(array(E), index) -> E

    Returns element of ``array`` at given ``index``.
    If ``index`` > 0, this function provides the same functionality as the SQL-standard subscript operator (``[]``),
    except that the function returns ``NULL`` when accessing an ``index`` larger than array length, whereas
    the subscript operator would fail in such a case.
    If ``index`` < 0, ``element_at`` accesses elements from the last to the first.

.. function:: filter(array(T), function(T,boolean)) -> array(T)

    Constructs an array from those elements of ``array`` for which ``function`` returns true::

        SELECT filter(ARRAY[], x -> true);
        -- []

        SELECT filter(ARRAY[5, -6, NULL, 7], x -> x > 0);
        -- [5, 7]

        SELECT filter(ARRAY[5, NULL, 7, NULL], x -> x IS NOT NULL);
        -- [5, 7]

.. function:: flatten(x) -> array

    Flattens an ``array(array(T))`` to an ``array(T)`` by concatenating the contained arrays.

.. function:: ngrams(array(T), n) -> array(array(T))

    Returns ``n``-grams (sub-sequences of adjacent ``n`` elements) for the ``array``.
    The order of the ``n``-grams in the result is unspecified. ::

        SELECT ngrams(ARRAY['foo', 'bar', 'baz', 'foo'], 2);
        -- [['foo', 'bar'], ['bar', 'baz'], ['baz', 'foo']]

        SELECT ngrams(ARRAY['foo', 'bar', 'baz', 'foo'], 3);
        -- [['foo', 'bar', 'baz'], ['bar', 'baz', 'foo']]

        SELECT ngrams(ARRAY['foo', 'bar', 'baz', 'foo'], 4);
        -- [['foo', 'bar', 'baz', 'foo']]

        SELECT ngrams(ARRAY['foo', 'bar', 'baz', 'foo'], 5);
        -- [['foo', 'bar', 'baz', 'foo']]

        SELECT ngrams(ARRAY[1, 2, 3, 4], 2);
        -- [[1, 2], [2, 3], [3, 4]]

.. function:: none_match(array(T), function(T,boolean)) -> boolean

    Returns whether no elements of an array match the given predicate. Returns ``true`` if none of the elements
    matches the predicate (a special case is when the array is empty); ``false`` if one or more elements match;
    ``NULL`` if the predicate function returns ``NULL`` for one or more elements and ``false`` for all other elements.

.. function:: reduce(array(T), initialState S, inputFunction(S,T,S), outputFunction(S,R)) -> R

    Returns a single value reduced from ``array``. ``inputFunction`` will
    be invoked for each element in ``array`` in order. In addition to taking
    the element, ``inputFunction`` takes the current state, initially
    ``initialState``, and returns the new state. ``outputFunction`` will be
    invoked to turn the final state into the result value. It may be the
    identity function (``i -> i``). ::

        SELECT reduce(ARRAY[], 0,
                      (s, x) -> s + x,
                      s -> s);
        -- 0

        SELECT reduce(ARRAY[5, 20, 50], 0,
                      (s, x) -> s + x,
                      s -> s);
        -- 75

        SELECT reduce(ARRAY[5, 20, NULL, 50], 0,
                      (s, x) -> s + x,
                      s -> s);
        -- NULL

        SELECT reduce(ARRAY[5, 20, NULL, 50], 0,
                      (s, x) -> s + coalesce(x, 0),
                      s -> s);
        -- 75

        SELECT reduce(ARRAY[5, 20, NULL, 50], 0,
                      (s, x) -> IF(x IS NULL, s, s + x),
                      s -> s);
        -- 75

        SELECT reduce(ARRAY[2147483647, 1], BIGINT '0',
                      (s, x) -> s + x,
                      s -> s);
        -- 2147483648

        -- calculates arithmetic average
        SELECT reduce(ARRAY[5, 6, 10, 20],
                      CAST(ROW(0.0, 0) AS ROW(sum DOUBLE, count INTEGER)),
                      (s, x) -> CAST(ROW(x + s.sum, s.count + 1) AS
                                     ROW(sum DOUBLE, count INTEGER)),
                      s -> IF(s.count = 0, NULL, s.sum / s.count));
        -- 10.25

.. function:: repeat(element, count) -> array

    Repeat ``element`` for ``count`` times.

.. function:: reverse(x) -> array
    :noindex:

    Returns an array which has the reversed order of array ``x``.

.. function:: sequence(start, stop) -> array(bigint)

    Generate a sequence of integers from ``start`` to ``stop``, incrementing
    by ``1`` if ``start`` is less than or equal to ``stop``, otherwise ``-1``.

.. function:: sequence(start, stop, step) -> array(bigint)
    :noindex:

    Generate a sequence of integers from ``start`` to ``stop``, incrementing by ``step``.

.. function:: sequence(start, stop) -> array(date)
    :noindex:

    Generate a sequence of dates from ``start`` date to ``stop`` date, incrementing
    by ``1`` day if ``start`` date is less than or equal to ``stop`` date, otherwise ``-1`` day.

.. function:: sequence(start, stop, step) -> array(date)
    :noindex:

    Generate a sequence of dates from ``start`` to ``stop``, incrementing by ``step``.
    The type of ``step`` can be either ``INTERVAL DAY TO SECOND`` or ``INTERVAL YEAR TO MONTH``.

.. function:: sequence(start, stop, step) -> array(timestamp)
    :noindex:

    Generate a sequence of timestamps from ``start`` to ``stop``, incrementing by ``step``.
    The type of ``step`` can be either ``INTERVAL DAY TO SECOND`` or ``INTERVAL YEAR TO MONTH``.

.. function:: shuffle(x) -> array

    Generate a random permutation of the given array ``x``.

.. function:: slice(x, start, length) -> array

    Subsets array ``x`` starting from index ``start`` (or starting from the end
    if ``start`` is negative) with a length of ``length``.

.. function:: trim_array(x, n) -> array

    Remove ``n`` elements from the end of array::

        SELECT trim_array(ARRAY[1, 2, 3, 4], 1);
        -- [1, 2, 3]

        SELECT trim_array(ARRAY[1, 2, 3, 4], 2);
        -- [1, 2]

.. function:: transform(array(T), function(T,U)) -> array(U)

    Returns an array that is the result of applying ``function`` to each element of ``array``::

        SELECT transform(ARRAY[], x -> x + 1);
        -- []

        SELECT transform(ARRAY[5, 6], x -> x + 1);
        -- [6, 7]

        SELECT transform(ARRAY[5, NULL, 6], x -> coalesce(x, 0) + 1);
        -- [6, 1, 7]

        SELECT transform(ARRAY['x', 'abc', 'z'], x -> x || '0');
        -- ['x0', 'abc0', 'z0']

        SELECT transform(ARRAY[ARRAY[1, NULL, 2], ARRAY[3, NULL]],
                         a -> filter(a, x -> x IS NOT NULL));
        -- [[1, 2], [3]]

.. function:: zip(array1, array2[, ...]) -> array(row)

    Merges the given arrays, element-wise, into a single array of rows. The M-th element of
    the N-th argument will be the N-th field of the M-th output element.
    If the arguments have an uneven length, missing values are filled with ``NULL``. ::

        SELECT zip(ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY['1b', null, '3b']);
        -- [ROW(1, '1b'), ROW(2, null), ROW(null, '3b')]

.. function:: zip_with(array(T), array(U), function(T,U,R)) -> array(R)

    Merges the two given arrays, element-wise, into a single array using ``function``.
    If one array is shorter, nulls are appended at the end to match the length of the
    longer array, before applying ``function``. ::

        SELECT zip_with(ARRAY[1, 3, 5], ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'],
                        (x, y) -> (y, x));
        -- [ROW('a', 1), ROW('b', 3), ROW('c', 5)]

        SELECT zip_with(ARRAY[1, 2], ARRAY[3, 4],
                        (x, y) -> x + y);
        -- [4, 6]

        SELECT zip_with(ARRAY['a', 'b', 'c'], ARRAY['d', 'e', 'f'],
                        (x, y) -> concat(x, y));
        -- ['ad', 'be', 'cf']

        SELECT zip_with(ARRAY['a'], ARRAY['d', null, 'f'],
                        (x, y) -> coalesce(x, y));
        -- ['a', null, 'f']
